and it's now recording in the other direction which is fabulous so I mean so for me I mean that is if I were ever well one of the things that helped me most in this book is conversations with a former BU student and her sister I'll get in touch with one of both of whom believed that the songs were not
I don't want to put this, were not defective.
Certain of the songs that have most mattered to me seemed to me to have something very wrong with them.
I didn't like having a sense that there was something wrong with them, though it was, of course, argumentatively convenient.
That is, in a funny way, it's a good idea if you're writing a book about Dylan to say, not of course that he's always great, take such and such and such and such.
And I had particular, One Too Many Mornings, I think is a wonderful song, and I had always
resisted the middle stanza.
I'd always thought there was something wrong with the middle verse.
Conversations with these people rather slowly persuaded me that I was not really attending to the middle.
That is, I was laying it as a charge against the middle verse.
What is, if you see it under a certain aspect, not a charge at all?
It's a truth about it.
It's a true description from which I have deduced a false judgment.
That is, there's something terribly flat about I gaze back to the room where my love and I have lain,
There's something very flat about that whole middle verse.
It was quite different from the first and the third.
And I had just assumed it had gone flat.
No, I think they were right to argue this with me.
It had been gone flat in some demerit way.
It was about a terrible numbness which overtakes the middle.
And it just goes, and, and, and, and we're both just walking away.
The human situation is to recover from that at the end, into something which is still sad, but is not completely drained and empty.
There's a kind of funny life coming, a different kind of life in the middle stanza from in the two others.
One final question, maybe even two, I know we've been weighing, but Shakespeare's been around for close to what, 1623 or whatever, and the play's 400 years or whatever?
400 years from now, do you believe that Dylan, even if we don't have the music, we don't have the performance, does the material endure as a text?
Well, I... Oh, without the music.
Without the music.
I guess I'm also asking if the music is a necessary monument of the work of art, I guess.
Well, I think that it is... I think it would be a bit like saying,
If you had only the screenplay for Citizen Kane, would people be able to realise when they filmed it?
I've never seen King Lear in performance, for instance, but I've read it... Yeah, yeah.
Well, I think... I think... I think there is a difference... I think there is a difference between... How to undergo this?
I don't think... It's tricky.
I don't quite want to say proportions,
because I don't think that hydrogen is more important than oxygen in water because there's twice as much of it.
That is, it's a particular compound by which the oxygen is just as important as the hydrogen, and there's only half as much oxygen.
So I don't quite want to say, as it were, extent of what's wonderful about Dylan is in the words, because it is a combination of a particular cadence which on the page is inaudible.
On the page it's inaudible, and it's perfectly fine that it's inaudible, because the cadencing was created by the voice in the music, not by the words alone.
That is, especially poems since the printing press, or poems that are not directly for an oral condition, you hear them in the theatre of your head, but you read the way they stand on the page.
Wonderful audile sensibility, and wonderful auditory imagination in Eliot,
And the work is all laid at the door of the words.
Plus the words.
Okay.
Would you kindly inscribe my copy of my word?
Does it matter to know what people like Dillon or Shakespeare or Keats or any of the great people that you've written about or studied, would it help you to know what they've read?
Yes, I think so.
I think the one understanding, the only one understanding you get of a work of art is knowing about his genesis.
There's no knowledge that you can have that you might not abuse.
Matthew Arnold is wonderful because Arnold repeatedly reminds us there's nothing you can know that you might not abuse.
There's no human benefit.
There's no aspirin that you can't abuse.
There's no knife that you can't stab somebody with.
All of these things lend themselves to abuse.
So that I think
I'm not going to say for every person who uses the knowledge of an author's reading wisely, there is exactly one person.
For every one, there's one who uses it unwisely.
But you can let knowledge of reading come between you and truly reading somebody's work because you can become the sort of person who, how long to put it, who deconstruct is a bad word, but it's the right word.
You may be somebody who will reduce the work of art
to the components that brought it about.
What I mean there is that understanding what components were brought about can be a great help.
On the other hand, there is always the danger that knowing what the components were would have you
caring about the compassions and not about the work.
I mean, there are critics, we know who they are, who care really only about the work of art, and that everything else really is irrelevant.
Yeah, yeah.
And maybe that's going too far in that.
Yeah, I think there's always silly and prudence.
I mean, people have different models of how to be right.
One model of how to be right is to hit the bullseye, the gold on the target.
That's not mine.
Mine is, how do you steer between the rock and the whirlpool?
It's a quite different figure of what the right thing to do.
You're always navigating.
You're always saying, at the moment, we're in more danger of stoniness than the flux.
At Eliot's point about, you know, I'm as cherry, he says, I'm as cherry of order as of disorder.
Petrefaction is no more and no less dangerous than putrefaction.
But you can say, at the moment, we're more in danger of putrefaction than the petrefaction.
That's not because, in the scheme of things, it's always the case.
that petrification is the lesser of the two evils.
I went to a BBC occasion that was honouring the Wasteland, and I was very struck by the fact that I was the only person there who didn't have a copy of the Wasteland manuscript.
And what that means is that now people read the published poem as if it were a rather unsuccessful attempt to write the manuscript.
They should read the manuscript as having been an unsuccessful attempt to write the poem, which then succeeded thanks to Ezra Bound and to Eliot's own self-criticism.
But, you know, there's a funny, the wish to reduce it to where it came from.
Well, it's just an intermediate step along the way of producing a work of art.
Yeah, exactly.
And it's essential if you're, you know, if you go to the University of Texas and where they have everything, you know, and...
which I read about in my first book, General Mattis.
I'd love to send you a couple of my other books.
Well, I would love you to send them, but that means... Not until you come back.
I would be surprised.